Today we take it completely for granted that
we know where we are at all possible times
and that's thanks to GPS technology that's
embedded into all sorts of devices; it's in
my phone, it's in navigation systems in cars
and so on, but it wasn’t always like this.
GPS is actually a fairly recent phenomenon.
GPS works by a large constellation of satellites,
24 satellites in space, sending down radio
signals which are received by the little GPS
receiver chips embedded into all these devices.
Now, these satellites are very, very complex
they contain atomic clocks and they are absolutely
massive. Now, this technology was originally
developed by the US military to help them
work out where all their assets and where
all their soldiers were at any particular
point in time, really key ability in the business
of war fighting to know where everything is.
It’s also particularly useful for civilians
and driving and so on, but it was not the
first application of GPS; it was strictly
military.
Now, in the year 2000, President Clinton signed
an order which made the high accuracy GPS
capability available to everybody on the planet.
Previously, the high accuracy was only available
to military users and for everybody else the
service was deliberately degraded, so it told
you roughly where you were, but with an accuracy
of 100 meters or something like that.
So, this was a revolution and the fact that
he made this order, turned off this deliberate
dilution of GPS accuracy is what’s enabled
this great revolution in location based services
that today we take for granted. So, it is
a fairly recent phenomenon, important to keep
that in mind.
Now, other countries who don’t want to be
reliant on the US-based GPS system, create
their own satellite based navigation systems
and Europe, Russia, and China are all putting
in place or have in place alternatives to
the GPS system. So, there are lots of satellites
up there providing navigation signals that
allow receivers on the ground to know exactly
where they are.
Now, a long time ago before there was GPS
was the problem with how did you know where
you were and this was a particularly important
problem during the Cold War. How do you send
your nuclear bombers to another country to
deliver pay loads if you can’t work out
where they are, particularly accurately, and
it’s also a real problem under water because
these GPS signals don’t penetrate water.
So, if you’re a submarine under the water
surface, working out where you are is quite
complex; you certainly can’t rely on GPS
navigation. If you want to go to the moon
and we did go to the moon, sent men to the
moon a long time ago, how do you navigate
around the moon where there is no GPS system?
And back then, there was no GPS system around
planet Earth and certainly there was no GPS
navigation system around the moon.
So, the way you do that is what’s called
inertial navigation, and this is a technique
that was pioneered by this gentleman, Charles
Stark Draper, back in the 1950s and the 1960s,
and he was in fact declared Time Man of the
Year in 1961 for his contributions to engineering
knowledge, particularly this inertial navigation
technology.
So, inertial navigation technology relies
on measuring continuously the acceleration
of the body, so if I had the sensors on me
that measured my acceleration and other sensors
called gyroscopes which measure my rotation.
By processing the accelerating signal and
the rotation signal, combining them with some
pretty clever algorithms, I can work out at
any point in time where I am. This technology
was pioneered, was driven by the Cold War
that existed at that particular point in time.
This is the first inertial navigation system;
it was a massive piece of kit and it was able
to a guide bomber from the east coast to the
west coast of the United States, very, very
big piece of equipment, and there was an underwater
version of this which was used to accurately
navigate submarines for long periods of time
underwater, so they could accurately get from
one place to another just using this navigation
technology.
Another instance of this inertial navigation
technology is what got the Apollo space craft
to the moon, so that they’re able to miniaturize
this massive inertial navigation system and
shrink it down to a box that was about one
foot, cubed, and that’s what got the vehicle
to the orbit around the moon and also got
the vehicle then from the lunar orbit down
on to the surface of the moon and back up
again, and this was in 1968.
So, phenomenal technological progress from
an idea to a massive sensor through to a relatively
small sensor that could be used for landing
men on the moon.
Today inertial navigation system is almost
a commodity. It’s reduced to the size of
a single chip, and these inertial navigation
chips, which contain accelerometers and gyroscopes
are embedded into devices like our phones;
this is how our phone knows whether it’s
in portrait mode or in landscape mode. It’s
how we use it to play games just by moving
the phone around, these are all done with
inertial navigation technology. Smart toys,
like this quadrotor here, use inertial navigation
sensors to keep the vehicle balanced in space
and to keep it stable.
They’re used in many, many, many, many technologies
and many, many applications. So, in this particular
lecture, we’re going to talk about how inertial
measurement systems work.